GRADUATION: Write up the Governance and Steering documents (#6260)
cert-manager/cert-manager: GOVERNANCE.md

# cert-manager Governance

This document defines project governance for the cert-manager project. Its
purpose is to describe how decisions are made on the project and how anyone can
influence these decisions. We have six levels of responsibility, each one
building on the previous:

- Contributor,
- GitHub Member,
- Reviewer,
- Approver,
- Maintainer,
- Admin.

## Contributors

cert-manager is for everyone. Anyone can become a cert-manager contributor
simply by contributing to the project, whether through code, documentation, blog
posts, community management, or other means. As with all cert-manager community
members, contributors are expected to follow the [cert-manager Code of
Conduct][coc].

All contributions to cert-manager code, documentation, or other components in
the cert-manager GitHub org must follow the guidelines in [the contributing
page][contrib]. Whether these contributions are merged into the project is the
prerogative of the reviewers, approvers and/or maintainers.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe for consistency and explicitness we have a "how to become" and "privileges" section for contributor too? Like we do for all the other roles in this doc?

Author: Done, thanks!

## GitHub Members

> GitHub Members are active contributors to the cert-manager project.

Author: Excellent point, I think we kind of forgot to include all of the project of the org, e.g., how one can become an approver or reviewer of a certain project instead of the whole org.

A contributor is considered to be active when they have had at least one
interaction (comment on an issue or PR or message in the #cert-manager or #cert-
manager-dev channels) within the last 18 months.

Members that have been inactive over the past 18 months may be removed from the
GitHub organization.

**Defined by:** Member of the cert-manager GitHub organization.

### Becoming a GitHub Member

To be added as a GitHub member of the cert-manager organization, you will need
to look for two sponsors with at least the `reviewer` role. These two sponsors
must have had some meaningful interaction with you on an issue on GitHub or on
the cert-manager or cert-manager-dev channels on Slack.

> Then, open an issue on the cert-manager repository and mention your sponsors as

Reviewer 2: Could it make sense to create a dedicated project for the "community" - as we have in Kubernetes: https://github.com/kubernetes/community. IMO that would be a bit cleaner, and creating a new "container" for the cert-manager community might become useful in the future.

I think it would also make sense to create an issue template for membership request issues.

Reviewer 3: @maelvls I think this makes sense, WDYT?

Author: Yes, it makes a lot of sense. @SgtCoDFish is also in favor of having a separate repository for the governance document and the membership GitHub issues and PRs. I'll try to have it sorted today.

> well as links to the meaningful interations (Slack threads, GitHub issues). Ask

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
well as links to the meaningful interactions (Slack threads, GitHub issues). Ask
```

your sponsors to confirm their sponsorship by commenting on your PR. After that,
your request will be reviewed by a cert-manager admin, in accordance with their
SLO.

To be added as a GitHub member, you will also need to enable [two-factor
authentication][] on your GitHub account.

GitHub members are encouraged to engage with the [cert-manager-dev][] mailing list as well as the [cert-manager](https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/cert-manager) and [cert-manager-dev](https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/cert-manager-dev) Slack channels.

[two-factor authentication]: https://help.github.com/articles/about-two-factor-authentication

> [cert-manager-dev]: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!forum/cert-manager-dev

Author: You are right, `[cert-manager-dev][]` refers to the link defined here. I'll fix the other inline links to avoid the confusion

## Reviewers

The mission of the reviewer is to read through PRs for quality and correctness
on all or some part of cert-manager. Reviewers are knowledgeable about the

> codebase as well as software engineering principles.

Author: I have added the following:

> Individuals with expertise in documentation, website content, and other facets of the project are also
encouraged to join as reviewers.

**Defined by:** the `reviewers` section in the file [`OWNERS`](./OWNERS).

### Becoming a Reviewer

> To become a reviewer, you will need to look for a sponsor with at least the
> approver role. Your sponsor must have had close interactions with you: he must
> have been closely reviewed one of your PRs or worked with you on a thorny issue.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To become a reviewer, you will need to look for a sponsor with at least the
approver role. Your sponsor must have had close interactions with you: they must
have closely reviewed one of your PRs or worked with you on a thorny issue.
```

> have been closely reviewed one of your PRs or worked with you on a thorny issue.

Author: Done.

- Create and attend meetings with the cert-manager Steering Committee (not less than once a quarter).
- Attend "maintainers vote" meetings when one is scheduled.

### Maintainer Decision-Making

Substantial changes to the project require a "maintainers decision". This includes,
but is not limited to, changes to the project's roadmap, changes to the project's
scope, fundamental design decisions, and changes to the project's governance.

A "maintainers decision" is made using lazy consensus. Email or Slack
can be used to reach lazy consensus as long as the deliberation date
and time are specified and the maintainers are CC'ed. You may use the
following message template:

> Dear maintainers, I'd like us to reach an agreement on the following matter using lazy consensus: [...]
> - 🧑‍💻 Participants: @cert-manager-maintainers
> - 📢 Deadline: April 3rd, 2023 23:59 UTC  
> - 🚨 Note: to speed up the process, you may answer with a :+1: or a comment stating that your are lazy to help reach consensus before the deadline.

Any non-agreements with regards to the decision can be posted as comments on the Slack message or to the email thread.

> 

Author: Agreed. I propose:

> While most decisions are typically reached through the principle of lazy consensus, there exists the option for a maintainer to propose a formal vote. Unless otherwise specified, such a vote would require a simple majority approval from all maintainers to be considered successful. Situations that might warrant a formal vote include, but are not limited to, cases where a decision necessitates explicit input from every participant or when disagreements arise during a lazy consensus discussion.

WDYT

> 

Reviewer 5: > I am unsure how to include the "binding" part. Is "binding vote" defined as "a vote that is associated with a justification"?

I think that's my bad, I didn't really mean "binding". I meant a "voting process with mandatory responses". I like what you wrote.

The only other issue I can see with this process is that there's currently no process defined for someone that refuses or consistently forgets to vote despite it being required.

Maybe after some period of time without voting (maybe a week?) the non-voter automatically becomes an "abstain". I think there should also be some kind of repercussion (e.g. if a user doesn't bother to vote for several votes in a row they automatically become an emeritus maintainer). Maybe we don't need to define that yet though!

> 

Author: Ah, I get it. I have added the paragraph about the voting procedure, and I haven't specified how we should behave in case someone won't cast their vote quickly enough. I agree, we can figure it out when that happens.

GitHub members are encouraged to engage with the mailing list [cert-manager-dev@googlegroups.com](https://groups.google.com/g/cert-manager-dev) as well as the [`#cert-manager`](https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/cert-manager) and [`#cert-manager-dev`](https://kubernetes.slack.com/messages/cert-manager-dev) channels on the Kubernetes Slack.

### GitHub Member Responsibilities

No extra responsabilities.

## Reviewer

The mission of the reviewer is to read through PRs for quality and correctness
on all or some part of cert-manager. Reviewers are knowledgeable about the
codebase as well as software engineering principles. Individuals with expertise
in documentation, website content, and other facets of the project are also
encouraged to join as reviewers.

**Defined by:** the `reviewers` section in the file [`OWNERS`](./OWNERS).

### Becoming a Reviewer

To become a reviewer, you will need to look for a sponsor with at least the
approver role. Your sponsor must have had close interactions with you: they must
have closely reviewed one of your PRs or worked with you on a complex issue.

> Then, create a PR on the [community][] repository to add your name to the list

Reviewer 3: @maelvls the PR should be in the repo itself, not on the community repo.

Author: Thanks for catching this!

> # cert-manager Governance (proposal)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# cert-manager Governance
```

This document defines project governance for the cert-manager project.

## Contributors

cert-manager is for everyone. Anyone can become a cert-manager contributor
simply by contributing to the project, whether through code, documentation, blog
posts, community management, or other means. As with all cert-manager community
members, contributors are expected to follow the [cert-manager Code of
Conduct][coc].

All contributions to cert-manager code, documentation, or other components in
the cert-manager GitHub org must follow the guidelines in [the contributing
page][contrib]. Whether these contributions are merged into the project is the
prerogative of the maintainers.

> 

Reviewer 3: TODO: add new section "## Approvers (=committer)"

> 

Reviewer 3: TODO: add new section "## Reviewer"
= someone who can /lgtm PRs

> 

Reviewer 3: TODO: add new section "## Admin"
= someone who has admin privileges on the cert-manager infrastructure
= someone who can create new cert-manager releases

> ## Maintainers

Reviewer 3: maintainer
= someone who can correspond with CNCF on behalf of the project
= someone who can participate in a "maintainers vote"

Maintainers have the ability to merge code into the project. Anyone can become a
cert-manager maintainer (see "Becoming a maintainer" below.)

> **Note:** In some CNCF projects, a difference is made between a "committer"
> and a "maintainer" (cf. [committer-vs-maintainer][]). In the context of the
> cert-manager project, committer and maintainer are the same. We will be using
> the term "maintainer" throughout this document.

[committer-vs-maintainer]: https://github.com/cncf/toc/pull/876#issuecomment-1189399941

The cert-manager maintainers are:

- James Munnelly (@munnerz)
- Josh van Leeuwen (@joshvanl)
- Richard Wall (@wallrj)
- Jake Sanders (@jakexks)
- Maël Valais (@maelvls)
- Irbe Krumina (@irbekrm)
- Ashley Davis (@sgtcodfish)

> - Tim Ramlot (@inteon)

Reviewer 3: maybe we should move this to `MAINTAINERS.md`

- Monitor the cert-manager-dev and cert-manager-dev channels on Slack, and help out when possible.
The mission of the reviewer is to read through PRs for quality and correctness
on all or some part of cert-manager. Reviewers are knowledgeable about the
codebase as well as software engineering principles. Reviewers are defined in
the file [`OWNERS`](./OWNERS).

### Becoming a Reviewer

## Reviewer Role
To become a reviewer, you will need to look for a sponsor with at least the
`approver` role. Then, create a PR to add your name to the list of `reviewers`
in the `OWNERS` file. The PR description should list your significant
contributions.

Reviewers are able to review code for quality and correctness on some part of cert-manager.  
They are knowledgeable about both the codebase and software engineering principles.
Your sponsor must have the approver role. Your sponsor must have had close
interactions with you: he must have been closely reviewed one of your PRs or
worked with you on a thorny issue. The sponsor is expected to give his approval
as a comment on the `OWNERS` PR. Additionally, your `OWNERS` PR should list your
substantial contributions to the project.

> **Defined by:** `reviewers` entry in the cert-manager [OWNERS](./OWNERS) file

Reviewer 3: @maelvls could we keep these **Defined by:** sections? I think that for these  sections it is quite useful to have them seperate from the text description.

- Stay up to date with the project's direction and goals,
  e.g., by attending some of the bi-weekly meetings, standups,
  or being around in the cert-manager-dev Slack channel.

### Privileges

- Can `/approve` on pull requests.

## Maintainer

A maintainer is someone who can communicate with the CNCF on behalf of the
project and who can participate in a maintainers vote. The list of maintainers
is available in the file [`MAINTAINERS.md`](./MAINTAINERS.md).

### Becoming a Maintainer

Anyone can become a cert-manager maintainer. Maintainers should be proficient in
Go; have expertise in at least one of the domains (Kubernetes, PKI, ACME); have
the time and ability to meet the maintainer expectations above; and demonstrate
the ability to work with the existing maintainers and project processes.

To become a maintainer, start by expressing interest to existing maintainers.
Existing maintainers will then ask you to demonstrate the qualifications above
by contributing PRs, doing code reviews, and other such tasks under their
guidance. After several months of working together, maintainers will decide

> whether to grant maintainer status.

Reviewer 3: I don't really agree with this section, I think this section contains tasks for approvers and reviewers.

Author: Good point, I wrongly copy paste the old Becoming a Maintainer. I’ll fix it
